I'll start with two of the most important built-in functions right away,
I will start with the setTimeout function here and as I explained, this is a built-in function or a method
on the window object to be precise.
So on this window object and again in the browser, you are on this window object by default, this is
your global scope,
you can execute the setTimeout method.
Now what will this method do?
It will wait for a certain amount of milliseconds you specify and then it will execute a function.
Therefore this method here expects two arguments,
the first argument is the function it should execute
and now here you could either point towards a function you created in your code with the traditional
approaches you learned or you can pass a closure, so an anonymous function here. I'll do the latter and
I will just provide a function, then the code which should get executed
and remember, we're still inside the argument list here,
so then I will add a comma to add the second argument. Here
I specify the amount of milliseconds this timeout or this timer should wait before executing this function
.
So I'll specify 2000, so two seconds and then I want to print finished.
Now what do you think we'll see if I hit run?
Well nothing for two seconds but then finished because as explained, the setTimeout function will
wait for two seconds and then execute all the code inside this function which has passed as the first
argument
and this is a very important built-in method which of course allows you to trigger some events in your application,
to create little animations, for example to fetch some code after a specific time has passed and so on,
so
really something important which allows you to create awesome user experiences and which you'll often
use in your application.
Now another very important built-in function is setInterval.
Now as setTimeout, this is registered on the window object, it's a method of the window object
and it works very similar.
It also expects a function as the first argument
and again you don't have to use a closure here,
you could just point towards a function you created in the code like you learned it before
and then as a second argument, you provide the interval in milliseconds,
for example 500 for half a second.
Now what this function will do is it will run this function you specify as the first argument,
so this function here every 500 milliseconds,
so twice a second basically and it won't stop by default,
so if I now print Ping! here for example, to show each individual ping, I can hit
run, you get a lot of pings and that won't stop.
So in order to stop, I'll get rid of the code here, hit run again to run the new code
and now I finish this, then I just revert it back to the old state.
Now of course as you saw, this function keeps running so it executes this code twice a second
in this case and maybe you want this behavior, maybe you do need an interval which has to run some code
every five seconds or whatever in your application but maybe you want to stop it at some time in the
future.
To do this, I'll create a variable named interval and I just assign setInterval to this variable.
So now I just have a reference to the setInterval method here
and then let's say at some point in my code, I run a certain check where I see if I still need
the interval and I will demonstrate this with the timeout function here.
So I'll have timeout function from before
and let's say after 2500 seconds, I'll want to stop the interval and I can do this with the clearInterval
method, also
available on the window object and I pass the interval,
so this variable, in which I stored this interval.
So now if I hit run, what do you think we'll see?
Well, we got ping five times because we're executing it 5 times, 2500 milliseconds by 500, divided
by 500.
So we have this timeout which will stop the interval here after two and a half seconds which of course
means that the interval got fired five times until then.
And this is how you can work with setTimeout and setInterval to execute code depending on some
timing and which, again as mentioned before, might be used for creating nice animations, fetching some
data, whatever,
you will probably often use this and it's important to know how to use it, how to clear this interval
if you don't need it anymore and how both functions can interact with each other, like this.
Of course you could also call setTimeout inside an interval or the other way around,
there are no limitations.
These are just built-in methods and can be used as such.